Introduction
============

Why HyperDex?
-------------

HyperDex is a relatively new distributed key-value store designed from the
ground up to provide a convenient user interface without sacrificing reliability
or robustness.  The result is a NoSQL storage system that provides a unique set
of features not found together in other NoSQL or RDBMS systems.  HyperDex is:

 * **Fast**:  HyperDex has lower latency, higher throughput, and lower variance
   than other key-value stores.

 * **Scalable**:  HyperDex scales as more machines are added to the system.

 * **Consistent**:  HyperDex guarantees linearizability for key-based
   operations.  Thus, a read always returns the latest value inserted into
   the system.  Not just "eventually," but immediately and always.

 * **Fault Tolerant**:  HyperDex automatically replicates data on multiple
   machines so that concurrent failures, up to an application-determined limit,
   will not cause data loss.

 * **Searchable**:  HyperDex enables efficient lookups of secondary data
   attributes.

 * **Easy-to-Use**:  HyperDex provides APIs for a variety of scripting and
   native languages.

 * **Self-Maintaining**:  A HyperDex is self-maintaining and requires little
   user maintenance.

About this Book
---------------

This book is the definitive reference manual for HyperDex users and developers
and is updated in tandem with each release.  A free copy of this book is
available at http://hyperdex.org/ in HTML and PDF form and is distributed in all
release tarballs.  The HyperDex developers are constantly improving both
HyperDex and this reference manual.  If you would like to provide feedback on or
contribute to this manual, please use the contact information provided in the
next section to help the HyperDex developers make this manual even better.

The first half of the book is devoted to users of HyperDex.
:ref:`Chapter 2 <installation>` provides instruction for installing the latest
HyperDex release from either precompiled packages or source tarballs.
:ref:`Chapter 3 <quickstart>` is a short tutorial that walks through the
basics of interacting with and maintaining a HyperDex cluster.

Online Help and Support
-----------------------

If you run into trouble while working with HyperDex, don't panic!  The HyperDex
team and community maintain many free resources online designed to help users
who are having trouble with HyperDex.

 * `HyperDex Discuss Mailing List`_:  This open mailing list is most users'
   first resource solving problems.  Anyone may email the list seeking help and
   messages are archived for the benefit of all.  Please follow proper `mailing
   list etiquette`_ to make it easy for us to help you.  By doing so, you'll not
   only make it easy for us to answer your question and provide a quick answer,
   but you'll also leave a useful message in the archive to help future users.

 * `HyperDex IRC Channel`_:  The **#hyperdex** IRC channel on
   **irc.freenode.net** is a great place to ask questions and interact with
   HyperDex's developers in real-time.  We thank the Freenode_ project for
   hosting the resource for us.

 * `HyperDex Bug Tracker`_:  If you've encountered an error in the code that you
   think may be a bug, please check the bug tracker to see if other users have
   reported the same problem.  Consider reporting the problem yourself if it
   looks like the problem has not yet been reported.

 * `HyperDex Papers`_:  If you're interested in developing or changing the
   internals of HyperDex, most of the publications are available online and are
   a great spot to familiarize oneself with the design of HyperDex.

Please keep in mind that many of the people you'll meet through these resources
are volunteers working on HyperDex in their free time.  If you have more-urgent
needs, you can contact the team of core HyperDex developers directly at
*hyperdex-team* **at** *systems* *dot* *cs* *dot* *cornell* *dot* *edu*

.. _HyperDex Discuss Mailing List: https://groups.google.com/group/hyperdex-discuss
.. _mailing list etiquette: http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/articles/mailing-list-faq/etiquette.html
.. _HyperDex IRC Channel: http://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=hyperdex&uio=d4
.. _HyperDex Bug Tracker: https://github.com/rescrv/HyperDex/issues
.. _HyperDex Papers: http://hyperdex.org/papers/
.. _Freenode: http://freenode.net/
