.. _asynchronous:

Asynchronous and Atomic Operations
==================================

Thus far, all HyperDex operations we've seen are *synchronous*, that is, the
application calls the HyperDex operation and blocks until the operation is
complete.  HyperDex is very fast, but even so, clients may spend a non-trivial
amount of time waiting on HyperDex operations.  For each operation in HyperDex,
there is an *asynchronous* variant that accomplishes the same task, but allows
the client to perform other work while the operation completes.

In this chapter, we'll look at the asynchronous operations HyperDex supports,
and see different ways to use them to increase concurrency in the system.

Setup
-----

As in the previous chapters, the first step is to deploy the cluster and connect
a client.   First we launch and initialize the coordinator:

.. sourcecode:: console

   $ replicant daemon -f -l 127.0.0.1 -p 1982
   $ hyperdex initialize-cluster -h 127.0.0.1 -p 1982

Next, let's launch a few daemon processes to store data.  Execute the following
commands (note that each instance binds to a different port and has a different ``/path/to/data``):

.. sourcecode:: console

   $ hyperdex daemon -f --listen=127.0.0.1 --listen-port=2012 \
                        --coordinator=127.0.0.1 --coordinator-port=1982 --data=/path/to/data1
   $ hyperdex daemon -f --listen=127.0.0.1 --listen-port=2013 \
                        --coordinator=127.0.0.1 --coordinator-port=1982 --data=/path/to/data2
   $ hyperdex daemon -f --listen=127.0.0.1 --listen-port=2014 \
                        --coordinator=127.0.0.1 --coordinator-port=1982 --data=/path/to/data3

We now have three different daemons ready to serve in the HyperDex cluster.
Finally, we create a space which makes use of all three systems in the cluster.
In this example, let's create a space that may be suitable for storing friend
lists in a social network:

.. sourcecode:: console

   >>> import hyperclient
   >>> c = hyperclient.Client('127.0.0.1', 1982)
   >>> c.add_space('''
   ... space friendlists
   ... key username
   ... attributes
   ...    string first,
   ...    string last,
   ...    set(string) friends
   ... ''')

.. todo::

   .. sourcecode:: pycon

      >>> c.add_space('''space rt key x''')
      >>> c.rm_space('rt')

   .. sourcecode:: pycon

      >>> c.add_space('''
      ... space userlocks
      ... key username
      ... ''')

Finally, our object for John Smith and some others

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> c.put('friendlists', 'jsmith1', {'first': 'John', 'last': 'Smith'})
   True
   >>> c.put('friendlists', 'jd', {'first': 'John', 'last': 'Doe'})
   True
   >>> c.put('friendlists', 'bjones1', {'first': 'Brian', 'last': 'Jones'})
   True

Asynchronous Operations
-----------------------

Asynchronous operations permit applications to retrieve or modify multiple
objects simultaneously and to perform local computation while doing the same.
In previous chapters, we submitted synchronous operations to the key-value
store, where each client had just a single outstanding request, and waited
patiently for that request to complete.  In high-throughput applications,
clients may have a bactch of operations that may be performed simultaneously.
The standard practice in such cases is to issue *asynchronous* operations, where
the client does not immediately wait for each individual operation to complete.
HyperDex has a very versatile interface for supporting this use case.

Asynchronous operations separate the request and response portions of a single
operation into two separate parts.  Each asynchronous operation returns a small
token that identifies the outstanding operation, which can then be used by the
client, if and when needed, to wait for the completion of the selected
operation.

Every API method covered in the tutorials so far (e.g. ``get``) has a
corresponding asynchronous version, usually prefixed with ``async_`` (e.g.
``async_get``), for performing asynchronous operations.  Those without an
``async_`` prefix are natively asynchronous.  The basic pattern of usage for
asynchronous operations is:

 * Initiate the asynchronous operation
 * Do some work and perhaps issue more operations, async or otherwise,
 * Wait for selected asynchronous operations to complete

This enables the application to continue doing other work while HyperDex
performs the requested operations.  Here's how we could insert an object for
user John Jackson asynchronously:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> d = c.async_put('friendlists', 'jj', {'first': 'John', 'last': 'Jackson'})
   >>> d
   <hyperclient.DeferredFromAttrs object at ...>
   >>> # do some work
   >>> d.wait()
   True
   >>> d = c.async_get('friendlists', 'jj')
   >>> d.wait()
   {'first': 'John', 'last': 'Jackson', 'friends': set([])}

Notice that the return value of the first ``d.wait()`` is ``True``.  This is the
same return value that would have come from performing ``c.put(...)``, except
the client was free to do other computations while HyperDex servers were
processing the ``put`` request.  Similarly, the second asynchronous operation,
``async_get``, queues up the request on the servers, frees the client to
perform other work, and yields its results only when ``wait`` is called.
In fact, the Python bindings implement all synchronous operations using their
asynchronous equivalents.  For example, here's a sample definition of ``get``:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> def get(client, space, key):
   ...     return client.async_get(space, key).wait()
   ...
   >>> get(c, 'friendlists', 'jj')
   {'first': 'John', 'last': 'Jackson', 'friends': set([])}


By itself, an asynchronous operation is not very useful if it is waited on right
away because that makes it equivalent to a synchronous operation.  The true
power comes from requesting multiple concurrent operations.  For example, to
establish a bidirectional friendship between John Smith and John Jackson:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> d1 = c.async_set_add('friendlists', 'jj', {'friends': 'jsmith1'})
   >>> d2 = c.async_set_add('friendlists', 'jsmith1', {'friends': 'jj'})
   >>> d1.wait()
   True
   >>> d2.wait()
   True

Note that the order in which operations are waited on does not matter.  We could
just as easily execute them in a different order, and still get the desired
effect.  Similarly, we could concurrently add multiple friends for John Smith:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> d1 = c.async_set_add('friendlists', 'jsmith1', {'friends': 'bjones1'})
   >>> d2 = c.async_set_add('friendlists', 'bjones1', {'friends': 'jsmith1'})
   >>> d3 = c.async_set_add('friendlists', 'jsmith1', {'friends': 'jd'})
   >>> d4 = c.async_set_add('friendlists', 'jd', {'friends': 'jsmith1'})
   >>> d1.wait()
   True
   >>> d2.wait()
   True
   >>> d3.wait()
   True
   >>> d4.wait()
   True

This allows for powerful applications.  Going a step further, HyperDex allows a
client to wait for the next operation to complete, without specifying an order
among asynchronous operations.  For instance, fetching the first names of every
friend of John can be done in parallel:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> friends_usernames = c.get('friendlists', 'jsmith1')['friends']
   >>> outstanding = set()
   >>> for username in friends_usernames:
   ...     outstanding.add(c.async_get('friendlists', username))
   ...
   >>> friends = []
   >>> while outstanding:
   ...     d = c.loop()
   ...     outstanding.remove(d)
   ...     friend = d.wait()['first']
   ...     friends.append(friend)
   ...
   >>> sorted(friends)
   ['Brian', 'John', 'John']

Using the :py:meth:`hyperclient.Client.loop()` method, it is possible to issue
thousands of requests and then wait for each one in turn without having to
serialize the round trips to the server.  It's even possible to keep a
fixed-size window of outstanding requests so as to not issue too many operations
concurrently.

Note that HyperDex may choose to execute concurrent asynchronous operations in
any order.  It's up to the programmer to order requests by calling ``wait``
appropriately.

Atomic Read-Modify-Write Operations
-----------------------------------

Atomic read-modify-write operations enable concurrent applications that would
otherwise be impossible to implement correctly. For instance, an application
which performs a ``get`` request followed by a ``get`` to the same key is not
guaranteed to have these two requests operate immediately back to back, even if
the client is using synchronous operations, as other clients may issue requests
to the key in the mean time.

The canonical example here involves two clients who are both trying to update a
salary field. One is trying to deduct taxes -- let's assume that they are
hard-working academics being taxed at the maximum rate of 36%, not the cushy 15%
that people on Wall Street seem to pay.  The other client is trying to add a
$1500 teaching award to the yearly salary. So one client will be doing
v1=GET(salary), v1 = v1 - 0.36*v1; PUT(salary, v1). The other client will be
doing v2=GET(salary), v2 += 1500; PUT(salary, v2), where v1 and v2 are variables
local to each client. Since these GET and PUT operations can be interleaved in
any order, it is possible for the clients to succeed (so both the deduction and
the raise are issued) and yet for the salary to not reflect the results! If the
sequence is GET from client1/GET from client2/PUT from client2/PUT from client1,
the raise will be overwritten. We certainly cannot have that!

Atomic read-modify-write operations provide a solution to this problem.  Such
operations are guaranteed to execute without interference from other operations.
The operation ensures that the read-modify-write sequence that comprises the
operation is executed in a manner that cannot be interrupted by or interleaved
with any other operation. The entire block is one atomic unit.

HyperDex supports a few different types of atomic instructions. Perhaps the most
general one is the ``cond_put``.  A ``cond_put`` performs an ``put`` if and only
if the value being updated matches a condition specified along with the new
values to be inserted.

In our example, let's say the application wants to change John Smith's name to
Jon Smith only if his name is unchanged, but wants the application to fail if
the application has changed his name since it was last read:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> c.get('friendlists', 'jsmith1')
   {'first': 'John', 'last': 'Smith', 'friends': set(['bjones1', 'jd', 'jj'])}
   >>> c.cond_put('friendlists', 'jsmith1',
   ...            {'first': 'John', 'last': 'Smith'},
   ...            {'first': 'Jon'})
   True
   >>> c.get('friendlists', 'jsmith1')
   {'first': 'Jon', 'last': 'Smith', 'friends': set(['bjones1', 'jd', 'jj'])}

Here we told HyperDex to update John's name if and only if it is currently equal
to "John".  The third argument is a set of attributes that must match the object
for the update to succeed.  The fourth argument takes the same form as a typical
``put``.

Not surprisingly, this request succeeded, as John's phone number matched the
specified values. Let's try issuing the same operation again.

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> c.cond_put('friendlists', 'jsmith1',
   ...            {'first': 'John', 'last': 'Smith'},
   ...            {'first': 'Jon'})
   False

Notice that ``cond_put`` failed because the value of the first name
field is no longer "John".

Note that the last argument has the same generality as the arguments to a
regular ``put`` operation. So there is no requirement that a
``cond_put`` check and update the same field. The following is a
perfectly legitimate operation that updates the first name field of Jon's
profile if and only if his phone number has not changed:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> c.cond_put('friendlists', 'jsmith1',
   ...            {'friends': set(['bjones1', 'jd', 'jj'])},
   ...            {'first': 'John'})
   True
   >>> c.get('friendlists', 'jsmith1')
   {'first': 'John', 'last': 'Smith', 'friends': set(['bjones1', 'jd', 'jj'])}

The great thing about HyperDex is that ``cond_put`` operations are
fast.  In fact, their performance is indistinguishable from a normal ``put``,
all else being equal.  Thus, you can rely heavily upon ``cond_put``
operations to avoid race conditions without sacrificing performance.
Going a step further, it's possible to use ``async_cond_put`` operations to
achieve even more concurrency without losing correctness.

Keep in mind that ``cond_put`` operations can and will fail, as intended, if
there are interceding operations that update the object fields that must match.
In these cases, the client will typically want to re-fetch the object,
re-perform its updates, and re-submit the conditional operation.

Another useful atomic primitive HyperDex provides is the ``put_if_not_exist``
operation.  This operation succeeds if and only if the object does not already
exist.  This can be useful to implement locking behavior.  For example, a simple
lock space can be used to provide per-user locking:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> c.add_space('''
   ... space userlocks
   ... key username
   ... ''')

With this space, we can atomically check if an object exists, creating it in the
process; or fail the operation, leaving the object unchanged.

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> c.put_if_not_exist('userlocks', 'jsmith1', {})
   True
   >>> c.get('userlocks', 'jsmith1')
   {}
   >>> c.put_if_not_exist('userlocks', 'jsmith1', {})
   False
   >>> c.delete('userlocks', 'jsmith1')
   True

This operation approximates the test-and-set mechanism used for implementing
concurrency controls in memory.  It's easy to build ``lock()`` and ``unlock()``
using these controls:

.. sourcecode:: pycon

   >>> def lock(client, user):
   ...     while not client.put_if_not_exist('userlocks', user, {}):
   ...         pass
   >>> def unlock(client, user):
   ...     client.delete('userlocks', user)
   >>> lock(c, 'jsmith1')
   >>> unlock(c, 'jsmith1')

Note that a real implementation might want to make provisions for when clients
fail while holding the lock.

.. todo::

   .. sourcecode:: pycon

      >>> c.rm_space('''friendlists''')
      >>> c.rm_space('''userlocks''')
